---
title: Double Encryption
date: 2017-06-08
layout: post
---
Suppose you have an encryption scheme consisting of the following algorithms:

* an encryption algorithm $$E$$ which takes a key $$k$$ and a plaintext $$m$$ and outputs a ciphertext $$E_k(m)$$;
* a decryption algorithm $$D$$ which takes a key $$k$$ and a ciphertext $$c$$ and outputs a plaintext $$D_k(c)$$ such that $$D_k(E_k(m)) = m$$ for all $$m$$.

Some people might believe that you can pull the following easy trick to increase the strength of the encryption.
Define an encryption algorithm $$E^\prime$$ and a decryption algorithm $$D^\prime$$ as follows:

$$\begin{aligned}
    E^\prime_{(k_1,k_2)}(m) &= E_{k_2}(E_{k_1}(m)),\\
    D^\prime_{(k_1,k_2)}(c) &= D_{k_1}(D_{k_2}(c)).
\end{aligned}$$

So you take two keys $$k_1$$ and $$k_2$$ and simply encrypt the plaintext $$m$$ twice using those keys.
Intuitively, if both keys are $$n$$-bit strings, then an attacker has to crack both of them in order to crack the entire scheme.
Specifically, it is conjectured that the attacker has no other option but to brute-force in the following way:

    For every key k1:
        For every key k2:
            Decrypt the ciphertext using (k1, k2).
            If the plaintext makes sense, halt and output (k1, k2).

The above algorithm takes time $$\mathcal{O}(2^{2n})$$, a quadratic improvement over $$\mathcal{O}(2^n)$$ time it would take to
crack only the original scheme.

However, matters are decidedly *not* this simple. The resulting scheme only requires $$\mathcal{O}(2^n)$$ time to crack in the worst case,
giving no benefit whatsoever! The reason is that an attacker can perform a so-called [meet-in-the-middle attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meet-in-the-middle_attack)
as follows. Given a single plaintext-ciphertext pair $$(m,c)$$, the attacker runs the following algorithm:

    For every key k:
        Encrypt m using k. Call this ciphertext c(k).
        Decrypt c using k. Call this plaintext m(k).
    
    Find keys k1, k2 such that c(k1) = m(k2).
    Output (k1, k2).

The attacker can use hash tables or other such data structures in order to find collisions between the plaintexts and ciphertexts in $$\mathcal{O}(1)$$ time.
Hence, the above algorithm runs in time $$\mathcal{O}(2^n)$$ since the entire keyspace is traversed only once.
Note also that any pair of keys $$(k_1, k_2)$$ output by the algorithm satisfies

$$
    E_{k_1}(m) = D_{k_2}(c).
$$

Thus, we have $$E_{k_2}(E_{k_1}(m)) = c$$, which is equivalent to $$E^\prime_{(k_1,k_2)}(m) = c$$.
So we recovered the keys used for the encryption in $$\mathcal{O}(2^n)$$ time.

This is not to say that repeated encryption using the same underlying scheme can never add any security.
(The [3DES](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triple_DES) cipher does exactly that by applying DES three times in a row.)
It only means that one has to take into account meet-in-the-middle attacks when designing ciphers that pull such a trick,
and beware that the added security does not scale as fast as we would like.