---
title: Lotteries and Fallacies
date: 2017-09-19
layout: post
tags: math
---
I recently came across [this Reddit thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/todayilearned/comments/70un9r/til_that_in_2010_israels_weekly_state_lottery/) about a news article reporting on the fact that, apparently, the Israeli lottery drew the same six numbers within a three week interval. The thread in question is filled with the usual amount of confusion and bad math which crops up in just about any Reddit thread concerning maths. This post is intended to clear up that confusion. In particular, I want to answer the following two questions which people seem to bitch about the most:

1. How likely was this event?
2. Is the Israeli lottery likely to be rigged based on this event?

I will address each question in turn. First, however, I'll describe how the Israeli lottery works. Apparently they choose seven numbers from 1 to 37, where the first six are the ones that were drawn twice. The seventh number is a "kicker", which we won't need to take into account since it didn't match anyway. Formally, let $$\vec{X} = (X_1, \dots, X_6)$$ be the random vector representing the outcome of a lottery draw. If the lottery is fair, then the components of $$\vec{X}$$ are each independent and uniformly distributed over $$\{1, \dots, 37\}$$. This would mean the probability of *any given draw* $$\vec{x} \in \{1, \dots, 37\}^6$$ is precisely

$$
    \Pr[\vec{X} = \vec{x}] = \frac{1}{37^6} = \frac{1}{2,565,726,409}.
$$

That is, any single draw has a probability of about one in 2.6 billion of occuring. Moreover, the draws are all *independent*: the probability of drawing $$\vec{x}_i$$ at time $$i$$ given that we drew $$\vec{x}_j$$ at any time in the past is exactly the same as the probability of drawing $$\vec{x}_i$$ at all. Formally,

$$
    \Pr[\vec{x}_i \mid \vec{x}_{1:i-1}] = \Pr[\vec{x}_i].
$$

So how likely was it to draw the same numbers within a span of three weeks? Just as likely as any other combination within any other time frame. That is, of course, assuming the lottery is actually fair (meaning the draws are independent and uniformly distributed). If it turned out that the lottery appeared to be systematically more likely to yield certain numbers more often than others, we could argue it was biased. We can formally study the problem of fairness as follows. Suppose we collect a random sample of draws the lottery has performed over the years, $$\mathcal{D} = \{ \vec{x}_i \mid i = 1, \dots, N \}$$. Let's assume that the components $$X_i$$ each follow the same categorical distribution:

$$
    X_i \sim \mathrm{Cat}(\vec{\pi}),
$$

where $$\pi_j$$ is the probability that we draw the number $$j$$. For simplicity, we are still assuming the components are independent. Given our data $$\mathcal{D}$$, the maximum likelihood estimates for the components of $$\vec{\pi}$$ are simple to compute: $$\pi_j$$ is just the number of times we drew the number $$j$$ divided by the total amount of numbers we have drawn. Formally,

$$
    \pi_j = \frac{\#\{ k \mid \exists i: x_{ik} = j \}}{6N}.
$$

It goes without saying that, in an honest lottery, these quantities should be close to $$1/37$$ for every $$j$$.

So is the Israeli lottery fair or not? Based on the data we are given in the article, we cannot come to any reasonable conclusion. The article linked in the Reddit thread has only two data points, and those two are *not* representative of the draws the lottery usually does. Quite the contrary: they have been selected specifically because they appear to be correlated. That is [data dredging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_dredging) if I ever saw it. In order to test whether the lottery is really biased or fair, we would need to look at a representative sample. That is, either we look at *all* the data (if that's feasible) or we look at a reasonably large subset of draws selected uniformly at random from all the draws the lottery has ever done. What we *don't* do is precisely what the article and many people in the linked Reddit thread are doing: select their data specifically so that it supports a given hypothesis.
