---
title: Birthday Problems
date: 2017-06-07
layout: post
tags: infosec
---
Consider this question: you are in a room with about 20 other people.
How high is the probability that you share a birthday with at least one other person in the room?
Since there are 365 days in a non-leap year, you would intuitively expect this probability to be very low.
As it turns out, however, the probability will be approximately 50%.
This counter-intuitive result is known as the [Birthday problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birthday_problem).[[^1]]

In general, we let $$S$$ be a set consisting of $$n$$ distinct elements.
We then sample $$0 < q \leq n$$ elements uniformly at random from this set, with replacement.
(The problem is trivial if $$q$$ does not lie within these bounds or if we sample without replacement.)
Let the sampled elements be $$s_1, \dots, s_q$$. We now ask what the probability is that we sampled the
same elements multiple times, i.e. the probability that $$s_i = s_j$$ for at least one pair $$(i,j)$$ where $$i \not= j$$.
Such an event is called a "collision", so we are looking for the probability of a collision happening.
This question can be phrased more naturally as follows: what is the probability that we do not sample $$q$$ distinct elements?
To compute this, we first determine the probability of sampling exactly $$q$$ distinct elements and then simply take the complement.
Denote the probability of sampling $$q$$ distinct elements from a set of $$N$$ elements by $$\mathrm{Samp}(q,N)$$.
To derive a formula for this probability, it helps to consider smaller cases.
The probability of sampling $$q$$ distinct elements from a set of $$N$$ elements is equal to the probability of sampling $$q-1$$
distinct elements and then sampling an element we have not seen before. In the simplest case, we sample only a single element and
so have probability 1 of not having any collisions. The probability of sampling an element we have not seen before is just the
probability of sampling any one element out of the remaining $$N-q$$ elements. We can thus write the following recurrence:

$$\begin{aligned}
    \mathrm{Samp}(1,N) &= 1\\
    \mathrm{Samp}(q+1,N) &= \mathrm{Samp}(q,N) \times \frac{N-q}{N}
\end{aligned}$$

The probability of a collision is then given by

$$
    \mathrm{Coll}(q,N) = 1 - \mathrm{Samp}(q,N).
$$

Let's take our original example again: you're in a room with about 20 people and you want to find the probability that you share
a birthday with somebody else there. We find

$$\begin{aligned}
    \mathrm{Coll}(23, 365) &= 51\% & \mathrm{Coll}(56, 365) &= 99\%
\end{aligned}$$

Amazingly, you're already at 51% as soon as the room contains 23 people.
Furthermore, if the room contains at least 56 people, the probability exceeds 99%!

Why does this matter? One might think the Birthday problem is just a curiosity which, if nothing else, merely demonstrates that
we should never trust our gut when it comes to matters of probability. However, this problem has real implications, particularly
in the field of cryptography. For many cryptographic applications, [hash functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_function)
are used. These are functions which map arbitrary-length inputs to fixed length outputs. For example, the SHA-256 hash function
takes an input of arbitrary length and outputs a 256-bit hash. In order to be useful in cryptographic applications, hash functions
are also required to be *collision-resistant*, meaning it should be hard to find distinct inputs whose hashes are identical.
Hashes are used in all kinds of problems, such as

* Password protection. Say you have a password that you use to authenticate on some server like Facebook.
The server could store your password in plaintext and then compare the password you entered to the one it has in
its database, and it grants you access only if they match. But this would obviously be insecure: if the server is
ever compromised, all passwords stored on it are available to the attacker. Moreover, employees of the company
managing the server could also read your passwords. To avoid these issues, passwords are hashed before being stored
on the server. It's the hashes that are then compared instead of the actual password. If the hash function is
collision resistant, it should be hard to find other passwords which have the same hash (and hence bypass the system).

* File deduplication. This is especially important in cloud storage, where the company managing the storage facility
wants to keep costs low. Before any file is uploaded to the cloud, first its hash is computed and checked against the
database. If a file already exists with the same hash, the file is only stored once and not uploaded again. Since the
hash will be much shorter than the file, this process is more efficient both in cloud storage requirements and in
bandwidth usage.

The Birthday problem applies to hash functions as follows. A hash is a function $$h: \{0,1\}^\star \to \{0,1\}^n$$
which takes a bit string of arbitrary length and maps it onto a bit string of fixed length $$n$$. Obviously, there
will be collisions since the input may be much longer than the output. The presence of collisions is problematic,
though: if collisions can be found efficiently for some hash function, then all constructions that use said hash
become insecure since their security relies on collision resistance. The most general approach to finding collisions
would be to try all possible inputs, which (we hope) would take $$\mathcal{O}(2^n)$$ time.
Unfortunately, due to the Birthday problem, an attacker can actually expect to find a collision in $$\mathcal{O}(2^{n/2})$$ time,
because it can be proven that $$\mathrm{Coll}(q, N) \geq 1/2$$ once $$q \approx \sqrt{N}$$.
For example, if our hash function outputs a 16 bit string, then there are $$2^{16} = 65536$$ possible outputs it can produce.
However, we have that $$\mathrm{Coll}(302, 65536) = 50\%$$.
Note that 302 is only slightly larger than $$\sqrt{2^{16}} = 2^8 = 256$$, but already after 302 distinct inputs
the attacker has at least a 50% chance of finding a collision amongst the inputs he sampled. If the attacker can evaluate the
hash function in a single second, then instead of having to spend 18 hours attempting to crack the hash, the attacker could
succeed in as few as five minutes! [[^2]]

Thus, when designing hash functions or other such systems, it is important to take the Birthday problem into account, since
it can significantly reduce the difficulty of attacking the system. The SHA-256 hash, for example, produces 256 bit strings
as output and hence it would still take approximately $$10^{31}$$ years ($$2^{128}$$ seconds) before the probability of a hash
collision exceeds 50%. [[^3]]

## Footnotes

[^1]: It is often also called the Birthday paradox, however many people (including myself) think this is a grave misnomer. An actual paradox is like [Russell's paradox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russell%27s_paradox), which demonstrates a real inconsistency in a formal system. There is nothing paradoxical about the Birthday problem; it is merely counter-intuitive but it does not show any contradictions in mathematics. If anything, the Birthday problem reveals just how bad our intuition sucks in matters of probability.

[^2]: Note that these are not realistic orders of magnitude. Hash functions can actually take about a second to evaluate, but they usually have outputs far in excess of 16 bits. The point here is simply to illustrate how much of a speed-up the Birthday problem can give an attacker attempting to find hash collisions.

[^3]: This analysis does need to assume that SHA-256 behaves like a "random" function, i.e. that its different possible outputs are all equally probable. If this is not the case, the speed-up the attacker can attain may be much larger.