---
layout: post
title: "Fake News"
date: 2017-02-01
tags: rant
---
Recently, a lot of noise has been made regarding the phenomenon of "fake news", also known as "hoax news". Wikipedia summarizes the notion as follows:

>Fake news websites (also referred to as hoax news) deliberately publish hoaxes, propaganda, and disinformation purporting to be real news — often using social media to drive web traffic and amplify their effect.
Unlike news satire, fake news websites seek to mislead, rather than entertain, readers for financial, political, or other gain.

The major reason fake news is suddenly enjoying such hype is the 2016 U.S. presidential election, with many people blaming Donald Trump's victory in part on fake news.
I try to make a point of keeping politics out of this blog, so I will say no more about Trump or his fans and detractors here.
Instead, I will focus on the public outcry and the supposed "solutions" to the fake news problem that appear to be gaining traction nowadays.
For example, Germany is considering to [fine social media companies](http://www.forbes.com/sites/parmyolson/2016/12/19/germany-wants-facebook-to-pay-for-fake-news)
if fake news ends up being spread on their platform, and at least [Facebook appears to take this seriously](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2017/01/16/facebook-combating-fake-news-germany-ahead-election/).

Let's get one thing out of the way first: fake news is definitely a problem, no doubt about it.
With the rise of social media and the blogosphere, this was pretty much inevitable and is not very surprising at all.
The internet is filled with people who all want to push their own agenda, and with the power of social media at their fingertips, these trolls have all they need to spread their nonsense virally.
The ramifications for democracy are clear and not very optimistic: if fake news is allowed to spread virally throughout a significant portion of the population who are prone to believing this
sort of thing without question, then you can expect this to eventually have an undesirable impact on the electorate and hence society in general.
So the question is: what can be done about it?

It has been argued that companies such as Facebook and Google should be responsible for filtering out fake news.
The solutions proposed appear to treat this like spam detection: if these companies can detect and remove spam automatically, then why not fake news as well? Should be a piece of cake.
Except it's not, for reasons which are abundantly clear to anyone who has ever seriously studied machine learning and/or spam detection.
Spam is different from fake news in several ways. Your average spam message can be detected rather easily. Here's a typical spam e-mail:

    ATTN:PRESIDENT/CEO


                        STRICTLY PRIVATE BUSINESS PROPOSAL
    I am MR.Johnson S. Abu, the bills and exchange Director at the
    ForeignRemittance Department of the Central Bank of Nigeria.  I am 
    writingyou
    this letter to ask for your support and cooperation to carrying thisbusiness
    opportunity in my department.  We discovered abandoned the sumof
    US$37,400,000.00 (Thirty seven million four hundred thousand unitedstates
    dollars) in an account that belong to one of our foreign customers,an
    American
    late Engr. John Creek (Junior) an oil merchant with the federal government
    of
    Nigeria who died along with his entire family of a wifeand two children in
    Kenya Airbus (A310-300) flight KQ430 in November2000.

    Since we heard of his death, we have been expecting his next of kin tocome
    over
    and put claims for his money as the heir, because we cannotrelease the fund
    from his account unless someone applies for claims asthe next  of kin to the
    deceased as indicated in our banking guidelines. Unfortunately, neither
    their
    family member nor distant relative hasappeared to claim the said fund.  Upon
    this discovery, I and other officialsin my department have agreed to make
    business with you release the totalamount into your account as the heir of
    the
    fund since no one came forit or discovered either maintained account with
    our
    bank, other wisethe fund will be returned to the bank treasury as unclaimed
    fund.

    We have agreed that our ratio of sharing will be as stated thus: 30%for
    you as
    foreign partner and 70% for us the officials in my department.

    Upon the successful completion of this transfer, my colleague and I
    willcome to
    your country and mind our share. It is from our 60% we intendto import
    computer
    accessories into my country as way of recycling thefund.  To commence this
    transaction we require you to immediately indicateyour interest by calling
    me
    or sending me a fax immediately on the aboveTelefax # and enclose your
    private
    contact Telephone #, Fax #, full nameand address and your designated
    banking co-
    ordinates to enable us fileletter of  claim to the appropriate department
    for
    necessary approvalsbefore the transfer can be made.

    Note also, this transaction must be kept strictly confidential becauseof its
    nature.

    NB: Please remember to give me your Phone and Fax No

    MR.Johnson Smith  Abu

Or take this one as another representative example:

    Subject: ADV: Interest rates slashed! Don't wait!

    INTEREST RATES HAVE JUST BEEN CUT!!!
        
    NOW is the perfect time to think about refinancing your home mortgage!
    Rates are down! Take a minute and fill out our quick online form. 
    http://www.newnamedns.com/refi/
            
    Easy qualifying, prompt, courteous service, low rates! Don't wait for
    interest rates to go up again, lock in YOUR low rate now!

Spam always has a few clear red flags which allow it to be detected fairly easily in the vast majority of cases:

1. If the e-mail contains an abundance of spelling errors and grandiose claims, it's most likely spam.

2. Spam usually tries to get the user to buy some amazing product or otherwise spend money.
In this regard, some spam is also part of a scam to steal money from unsuspecting victims.

3. Spam mails are always "dressed to impress": they will contain chunks of text written in ALL CAPS to grab your attention.

Put simply, spam messages are low-effort shitposts.
It is not hard to detect automatically using, for example, multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs).
I myself have recently created an MLP which achieves an accuracy of over 99% on the [UCI Spambase dataset](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Spambase).
It has only three hidden layers and 15 hidden units total, so this is really not hard to do.
Fake news, on the other hand, is something else entirely, though depending on the competence of the fake news author it can resemble spam sometimes.
Compare your typical spam message to the following articles which were all actually published as news:

1. [Obama Signs Executive Order Banning The Pledge Of Allegiance In Schools Nationwide](http://abcnews.com.co/obama-executive-order-bans-pledge-of-allegiance-in-schools/)

2. [Woman arrested for defecating on boss’ desk after winning the lottery](https://thevalleyreport.com/2016/04/25/woman-arrested-for-defecating-on-boss-desk-after-winning-the-lottery/)

3. [Pope Francis Shocks World, Endorses Donald Trump for President, Releases Statement](http://newsbreakshere.com/pope-francis-shocks-world-endorses-donald-trump-president-releases-statement)

Should any of these links die, the [Wayback Machine](https://archive.org/web/) can always be of assistance, as well as simply Googling the titles.
The thing to note about these articles is that, to the casual eye, they appear legitimate. The first article has a picture of Obama supposedly signing the Executive Order in question;
the second article has a mugshot of the woman that was allegedly arrested. All three articles even feature interviews with the people they're about.
Yet it is all fabricated! None of these stories are real, which you can tell just by Googling the titles. The search results are filled with counter-articles exposing these posts as
the fake news they are, but a casual observer most likely won't be able to determine this just by looking at the article itself. Moreover, they probably won't even expend the extra
three minutes of effort it takes to fact-check the article; usually, people who read articles like this immediately jump on the bandwagon and hop over to Facebook or Twitter or other
social media to rant about them as if they are factual. This in turn increases the articles' impact and may lead to them going viral, which is very undesirable indeed.

You can't combat fake news with the same methods used to combat spam, for the simple reason that these articles are written by people who have sufficient journalistic experience to
be able to present their stories as if they are real. A typical fake news article won't raise any of the red flags commonly associated with spam, such as poor grammar and spelling
or trying to scam the reader into giving away money. No, they are designed to either attract clicks and expose users to the ads that are the biggest source of revenue these sites have
or to push some political agenda. The former is a form of clickbait, which is annoying but not necessarily damaging in any way; the latter is where the problems really lie.
Articles specifically constructed to look like real news and to push some political agenda can and have been very influential, and the problem is there does not exist any reliable
way to automatically determine whether or not a given article is fake news.

Let's be reasonable here for a second. You cannot expect a company like Facebook, which [processes over 500TB of data every single day](https://www.cnet.com/news/facebook-processes-more-than-500-tb-of-data-daily/),
to manually moderate and audit every little post and comment that is made on their site to judge whether or not it constitutes fake news.
If you are of the persuasion that social media sites should filter out fake news (which is itself debatable, but it's not a debate I'm going to have here), you should at least admit
it would be *completely batshit insane* to expect them to be able to do this manually. It only makes sense to force companies to filter fake news if a reliable, automatic fake news detector
can be created. But there are good reasons to think this cannot be done, at least not in the same way it's done for spam. You can't just train a neural network or some other machine learning
model on fake and real news data sets and expect it to be able to tell the difference more than 50% of the time, because fake news is constructed to be indistinguishable from real news.
Fake news writers have shown they are incredibly adept at fooling people *en masse* into believing their bullshit, since the only way to verify whether or not any given news story is true
in general is to laboriously fact-check it. This is hard enough for humans to do already, and it is unclear how an AI would be able to do it at all given the state of the art in AI at the time
of this writing. Fact-checking any article requires a huge amount of *domain knowledge*, knowledge that is very specific to the problem at hand. Short of creating an artificial general intelligence,
there does not seem to be any plausible way this process could be automated.

There is, of course, a simpler solution, but it's much more controversial: simply block links to any website which is known to publish fake news regularly.
Facebook in particular is already very good at blocking sites known to host malware and present a danger to their users, even going so far as to follow through on redirects and other tricks
to prevent more elaborate scams from succeeding. There are several problems with this, though:

* Depending on your point of view, you might consider this censorship. Even if you didn't, the sites publishing the fake news would certainly attack this proposal from such an angle.
Given that these people are master manipulators, they may even get significant support in their position, and social media companies might be forced to unblock them for fear of losing users.
Don't make the mistake of underestimating this objection. Especially in the United States, all the fake news websites need to do is play the victim and claim the government is actively
censoring what people can read online and you've got yourself another civil war.

* Even legitimate news companies that try to have some form of quality control can fall victim to fake news. As I said, these people are manipulators, and they might just as well succeed in
tricking journalists who are worthy of the name into believing their story is real.

It should be clear now that even if a simple blacklist approach succeeds in blocking many forms of fake news, it's not going to block all of it, and you need to take this into account
if you want a fake news ban to be made actual law. Regulations such as proposed by Germany should accomodate the fact that, inevitably, not all fake news can be blocked, and fining
companies for failing to comply with a physically impossible demand is a little bit unfair to say the least.

In the end, I believe there is only one way the fake news problem can be effectively solved without stepping on too many political toes: **education**.
It is absolutely shocking how many people are woefully inequipped to deal with the lies, deception and nonsense which is hopelessly rampant on the internet.
Granted, telling the difference between truth and falsehood online can be challenging in some cases, but the majority of fake news can be debunked by doing a simple Google search
and checking whether the story has been independently verified. If it hasn't, it's probably not true. On average, such a quick fact-check takes less than ten minutes, so it's really
not that big of a deal. But a vast number of people fail to do this, or even fail to realize this might be called for. I have personally witnessed cases of people I know blindly
believing outrageous statements made in a fake news article by some shady "news" website with pop-ups and ads and other forms of digital cancer scattered all over.
Most of the time, the implicit assumption is made that anything which gets published online has to be true, especially if it aligns with their political and ideological priors.
Curiously, the same misconception appears to apply to print media as well.
How many times have you heard someone say some obviously false claim is true because they read it in a book or a paper somewhere? People underestimate how easy it is to get something
published, be it in print or online (but especially online). As a result, a lot of garbage gets published. Some of this garbage is political in nature and was created for the sole
purpose of pushing a biased political agenda into the mainstream. In my opinion, the only way to successfully combat this disease is to educate people about it. Make it clear that
they really should not believe anything whatsoever simply because they read it some place. Teach critical thinking skills; teach people to handle online media in a responsible way,
and the fake news problem should mostly dissolve.