---
title: The Bee Movie Meme but I Mathematically Analyze It
date: 2017-08-31
layout: post
---
In recent years, the [Bee Movie](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0389790/) (being a total piece of garbage) has become somewhat of a meme. Specifically, a depressingly great number of Youtube videos exist along the lines of "The Bee Movie but each time they say bee it gets 2x faster". This meme has been applied to other videos as well, like the [Mine Song](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iV0TIhYEoeE). The general template of this meme is

>Video X but each time Y happens I apply transformation $$f$$ to a parameter $$P$$ of the video.

For example, in the case of the Bee Movie, Y is the event that someone says "bee", $$P$$ is the runtime of the video and $$f$$ is simply division by two. If $$P$$ is scalar (which it usually is in these cases), we may investigate its rate of change as the video progresses. Suppose that the event Y which causes the change in $$P$$ follows a Poisson distribution with an average rate of $$\lambda$$ per second,

$$
    Y \sim \mathrm{Poi}(\lambda),
$$

which means that the probability of $$Y$$ happening $$k$$ times a second is given by

$$
    \Pr[Y = k] = \exp(-\lambda)\frac{\lambda^k}{k!}.
$$

The number of times that $$Y$$ happens in the interval of $$t-1$$ to $$t$$ seconds will be written as $$Y(t)$$. Note that $$Y(1) + \dots Y(t) \sim \mathrm{Poi}(t\lambda)$$, so the probability that $$Y$$ has happened $$k$$ times after $$t$$ seconds is given by

$$
    \Pr[Y(1) + \dots + Y(t) = k] = \exp(-t\lambda)\frac{(t\lambda)^k}{k!}.
$$

Denote by $$T(t)$$ the number of times that transformation $$f$$ is applied to $$P$$ in the interval $$[t-1, t]$$. We may then ask what the probability is that transformation $$f$$ is applied a certain number of times $$k$$ after $$t$$ seconds of video:

$$
    \Pr[T(1) + \dots + T(t) = k] = \Pr[Y(1) + \dots + Y(t) = k] = \exp(-t\lambda)\frac{(t\lambda)^k}{k!}.
$$

The expectation of this quantity is just $$t\lambda$$, as is its variance. Thus, after $$t$$ seconds of video, we can expect the transformation to have been applied $$t\lambda$$ times. In case this transformation consists of multiplying $$P$$ by a fraction $$\alpha$$ (as it usually does), we get $$f(P) = \alpha P$$ and so

$$
    f^t(P) = \alpha^t P.
$$

After $$t$$ seconds, we thus expect $$P$$ to assume the value $$\alpha^{t\lambda}P$$. If $$\alpha > 1$$ (or $$\alpha < 1$$), this yields an exponential increase (or decrease) in $$P$$ as time progresses. If the original video is $$n$$ seconds long and the parameter $$P$$ is its playback speed, then the expected runtime of the modified video is given by solving the following equation for $$t$$:

$$
    \alpha^{t\lambda}n = t.
$$

For example, if $$\alpha = 1/2$$, $$\lambda = 1/60$$ and $$n = 5400$$ seconds (i.e. an hour and a half, the average runtime of a movie) then $$t \approx 262$$ seconds, or less than five minutes. Clearly this stuff can get out of hand really fast: if we double the playback speed of an average movie each time some event Y happens, and if that event happens on average once every minute, then the entire movie can be compressed into approximately five minutes.
