---
title: The Problem of Democracy
date: 2017-08-20
layout: post
tags: rant
---
Most people would agree that democracy is pretty great, or at least that democracy is the best system for organizing society mankind has invented so far. There exist many different versions of democracy depending on the country implementing it, but the basic underlying ideas are all the same. The core principle of democracy is that the people themselves should decide how the country they live in should be run. In a direct democracy, this is realized by holding general referendums on every important issue, and letting everybody vote on the option they deem best. In an indirect democracy, the people only vote once every number of years to elect one or more political parties. The members of these parties, the politicians, will then act as the representatives of the people and vote on numerous issues on behalf of the people. This is the most common form of democracy, and is usually the form people are referring to when they talk about democracy.

Democracy is widely recognized as the most "just" form of government, the idea being that each and everyone's wishes are taken into account under such a system and hence the outcome of the system is optimal in a certain sense. In this post, however, I will argue that this is not the case. Specifically, there is one property of (almost?) all democratic systems which I take issue with, and which I believe should be altered. It is the fact that all votes are weighted equally. That is, one person's vote has the same value as any other person's vote. There are obvious advantages to this property, but in this post I will argue that there are also disadvantages which outweigh the stated benefits.

# The good

The fact that votes are weighted equally has the clear benefit that people cannot be discriminated against based on irrelevant attributes such as race or gender. Even worse, if votes are not weighted equally, then the people who control the weights have the ultimate power to change the results of the elections as they see fit: they can simply set the weights of all people who voted unfavorably (according to them) to zero, leaving only the votes they find favorable. This would be an obvious travesty, so any argument against this property should be very strong indeed.

# The bad

There are, however, also downsides to weighing all votes equally. For one, it discourages people from aptly informing themselves on political matters before casting their vote. If my vote counts just as much as the vote of the other guy who may not have any idea what the elections are all about, then why invest the time and energy to properly inform myself? I am not rewarded for these efforts in any way. This argument may be countered by claiming that a well-informed political opinion is its own reward in the sense that you will contribute to the victory of the party which is, in your eyes, the right choice. But under majority rule (which most democratic systems employ), this is only the case if my vote is the decisive one. This is very unlikely to happen for sizable populations with many voters. The problem is further exacerbated if one accepts the following postulates, which I do:

1. In matters of politics, the correct solution is often not the most intuitive one.
2. Most people vote with their gut.

In politics, arriving at the "right" decision is often a very difficult process and the conclusions may not be very intuitive. This is especially true today, when so many political issues touch on scientific problems which either have no known solution or whose solution is counter-intuitive even to experts who have dedicated the better part of their lives studying it. Also, most people do not think their political opinion through. [Confirmation bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confirmation_bias) is, in my experience, absolutely rampant in general but especially when it comes to politics. People don't like to change their minds; they merely wish to strengthen their priors, which are usually based on false or incomplete assumptions. Politicians know this and they exploit it, feeding into the biases of their target audience in order to obtain power.

The result is that the political spectrum ends up being completely disconnected from reality and instead focuses exclusively on catering to people's biases. This is a direct consequence of weighing all votes equally, since this principle implies that political parties should care only about the *quantity* of their voters and not their *quality*. It doesn't matter if the policies set forth by a party are completely unrealistic or even if they blatantly contradict scientific consensus; to the parties, the only thing that matters is how many people will buy it. The parties face no incentives to base their policies in science and the voters face no incentives to inform themselves on the problems they are voting on.

# The reality

These issues are not theoretical; they can be routinely observed in practice. Two examples immediately come to my mind:

* Climate change. Many political parties have built their empire around a demographic that denies climate change is a problem we have to deal with, even though the [scientific evidence](https://climate.nasa.gov/) overwhelmingly supports this position. Let me be very clear on this: people who are not experts in a certain scientific field $$F$$ have absolutely no business questioning the consensus of the experts in $$F$$. This is not to say they should be banned from voicing their opinions on such matters; I am very much pro freedom of speech. However, I also believe the opinions of uninformed people should not be taken into account when devising policies on important issues like climate change. The opinion of climate change deniers should be completely discarded by policy makers, as every single expert on the subject agrees with the scientific consensus. It's really not hard to see that the opinion of someone who barely knows what climate is does not hold a candle to the opinion of someone who has studied the world's climate for the better part of their adult lives.

* Cryptography. Recently, the debate surrounding government-mandated backdoors into cryptographic software has resurfaced, and just like the previous cryptowars of the 1990s the debate is dominated by people who barely know how to turn a computer on, let alone how encryption works. The [scientific consensus](https://www.schneier.com/academic/paperfiles/paper-keys-under-doormats-CSAIL.pdf) on this matter is clear: backdoors are not a good idea. Weakening commercial cryptography would not deter terrorists and it would compromise the privacy of innocent civilians. Yet no politicians appear to be listening to the experts. Indeed, the politicians are actively abusing people's fear of terrorism to push for government backdoors into cryptographic protocols, even though literally all cybersecurity experts agree this is a terrible idea.

Is this not an absurdly insane state of affairs? Think of it like this. Suppose you were put in charge of appointing a new pilot for a large airplane that could carry upwards of 500 people. You have two candidates before you to choose from: Alice and Bob. Alice is a very outgoing, sympathetic, likable person who seems to be very good with people and has this aire that just makes you feel comfortable. However, she has no formal pilot training whatsoever. In fact, after testing her in the simulator, you find she doesn't even know how to turn the plane's engines on. Then there's Bob. You don't know much about Bob personally, as he doesn't talk much and he actually comes across as kind of an asshole. What you do know, however, is that Bob was in the top of his class at the flight academy, and testing him in the simulator you find he knows the plane like the back of his hand. He has over 4000 hours of experience with the plane in question. Who do you pick? Let's not kid ourselves: you pick Bob. Given the choice between Alice and Bob for this particular position, the decision is a no-brainer.

The scenario I described above is the exact opposite of how politics works in democratic societies, however. If the appointment of a new pilot was left to public vote, I have no doubt in my mind people would pick Alice over Bob for the simple reason that Alice is the more likable person, and the public in general doesn't know the first thing about aviation. The fact that their very lives would be at stake if Alice ever got to fly a plane would undoubtedly never occur to the vast majority of people. You may think this is extreme, but this is exactly what's happening with the climate change fiasco, for example. There are literal lives at stake here, but still the public debate remains dominated by people whose only impressive attribute is their ability to manipulate other people into doing their bidding.

It simply does not make sense to weigh all votes equally in a democratic system, especially today when scientific knowledge has progressed far beyond the grasp of lay people. This should not be interpreted as elitism or arrogance of any kind: I freely admit this criticism also applies to myself. My opinion on issues that I know nothing of should also be discarded the same as everybody else. The point I want to make here is simply this: science is hard, and one cannot form intelligent opinions on scientific issues without dedicated study. Many people don't have the time or ability to do so, yet they are expected to routinely cast votes on issues for which a scientific understanding is required to come to the right conclusions. This is not to say science has solved every problem; it definitely hasn't. But it has solved many problems, and a considerable fraction of these solutions have political implications which cannot be appreciated by people who haven't studied them. I am also not criticizing people for not studying the relevant scientific literature surrounding certain political issues. I fully understand that not everybody has the time or the ability to do this. I include myself in this group: I am a computer scientist by trade, and I have little time to perform extensive reviews of, say, the economic literature surrounding basic income. So who am I to decide whether basic income is a good idea or not? Nobody; my opinion on that issue is totally irrelevant as I do not possess the required economic education to adequately judge the proposal. So why ask for my vote on it? My vote is essentially going to be random, as it's just a by-product of my own ill-informed biases.

# A possible solution

The equal weighting mechanism is in place for a very good reason, to be sure, but just because it solves a real problem doesn't mean it's a good solution. In fact, I believe giving every vote equal weight is a very poor solution, for the reasons outlined above. There would need to be some sort of mechanism which prevents manipulation and at the same time lends more weight to the votes of people who are better informed on the issues involved.

The simplest solution would probably be to subject every voter to a brief, anonymous examination before they are allowed to cast a vote. This exam would ask a few basic questions on important political issues, to judge how well-informed a particular voter is. The test score would then be converted into a weight associated with that person's vote. The score of a political party is then simply the weighted sum of all votes they received, where the weights are determined by the test scores of the respective voters.

There is one immediately obvious problem with this approach: whoever designs the test can, in principle, determine who gets to vote and who doesn't. So there has to be some way of ensuring the tests accurately reflect a voter's general knowledge of the relevant political issues. This may be achieved by having the political parties *themselves* design the test together. The procedure could roughly work as follows:

1. Every party submits a list of at most $$N$$ questions (for some $$N$$ fixed for all parties).
2. An independent committee compiles a test by taking a random sample of the questions from all lists.
3. All parties review the proposed test and may veto it.
4. If the proposal was vetoed, the procedure restarts from the beginning. Otherwise, the test is accepted. Each party only gets a limited number of vetoes per election to ensure the process cannot be sabotaged by infinitely vetoing tests. After exceeding their maximum allowed vetoes, the party in question cannot veto any more tests until the next election.

This is just one idea of mine on how to deal with the problem of political ignorance in a democratic society. I don't know if it's the right one, but I'm sure there are people out there who are able to devise a procedure that could work.
