---
title: Optimal taxation
date: 2017-05-20
layout: post
---
Almost everybody hates taxes.
To many people, having to give away a certain portion of their hard-earned income (in the case of an income tax)
while apparently receiving no tangible benefits in return is the source of much discontent.
Economically, however, taxes serve at least two valuable functions:

1. They allow for the provision of public goods.
Although work exists that shows [private provision of public goods is possible](http://econ.ucsb.edu/~tedb/Courses/UCSBpf/readings/privprov.pdf),
the scheme involves transaction costs that most people would probably deem too high. Innovations such as [Kickstarter](https://www.kickstarter.com/)
and [GoFundMe](https://www.gofundme.com/) are based on the scheme proposed in the linked paper, however, and they do seem to work well in many cases.

2. They solve negative externalities.
Again, work exists that shows [negative externalities can be dealt with without taxation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coase_theorem),
but such schemes again incur significantly higher transaction costs.

Governments can abuse taxes, of course. Dictatorial regimes often employ taxation in order to silence opposition, for example.
In this article, though, I will restrict attention to the mathematical side of taxation, not the economical or political side.

Suppose we have a population of $$n$$ people. Each person $$i$$ has an associated wealth $$w_i \geq 0$$ and the population
as a whole has to pay a certain cost $$K > 0$$ in taxes. The goal of an optimal taxation scheme is to find coefficients $$a_1, \dots, a_n$$
such that three conditions are met:

1. The cost $$K$$ is paid for:

$$
    \sum_{i=1}^n a_iw_i = K.
$$

2. For every $$i$$ we have $$0 \leq a_i \leq 1$$. This ensures no individual is taxed beyond their ability to pay.

3. Each individual $$i$$ has to pay as little as possible, i.e. $$a_i$$ is minimized for all $$i$$.

The most problematic point is the third one, since there are many ways in which one can interpret what it means for an individual to pay as little as possible.
For example, if we interpret the third point as stating that the sum of the coefficients $$a_i$$ must be minimal, then we find the following linear program:

>Minimize $$a_1 + \dots + a_n$$ such that $$a \cdot w = K$$ and $$0 \leq a \leq 1$$.

Consider a hypothetical society with three individuals whose wealths are $$w_1 = 10$$, $$w_2 = 15$$ and $$w_3 = 30$$ respectively.
Suppose a cost of 40 needs to be financed, then an optimal solution is given by $$a_1 = 0$$, $$a_2 = 2/3$$ and $$a_3 = 1$$.
This solution probably won't strike anyone as particularly fair: individual 1 has to pay nothing whereas individual 3 has to surrender
everything. Ironically, if we chose to maximize $$a_1 + a_2 + a_3$$, then in our example we would have found $$a_1 = 1/2$$,
$$a_2 = 2/3$$ and $$a_3 = 5/6$$, which might be deemed more acceptable. Moreover, the end result would be that everyone
ends up with the same amount of wealth, $$w_1 = w_2 = w_3 = 5$$. This is not always the case, though. If we had $$w_1 = 10$$, $$w_2 = 17$$
and $$w_3 = 31$$ then this scheme would choose $$a_1 = a_2 = 1$$ and $$a_3 = 0.42$$.

Perhaps if we try to minimize the largest coefficient? Then we have

>Minimize $$\max\{ a_1, \dots, a_n \}$$ such that $$a \cdot w = K$$ and $$0 \leq a \leq 1$$.

This is not a linear program exactly, so we need to make some modifications. We introduce a slack variable $$b$$ to obtain

>Minimize $$b$$ such that $$a \cdot w = K$$, $$0 \leq a \leq 1$$ and $$b \geq a_1, \dots, a_n$$.

In our example, this would yield $$a_i = 8/11$$ for all $$i$$.

We could also constrain the program so that an individual's ranking in society is not affected by the taxation.
If the individuals are labeled so that $$w_1 \leq \dots \leq w_n$$, then we could enforce that this also holds after the tax, i.e.
$$(1-a_1)w_1 \leq \dots \leq (1-a_n)w_n$$. This boils down to adding the following constraints:

$$\begin{aligned}
    a_2w_2 - a_1w_1 &\leq w_2 - w_1\\
    &\vdots\\
    a_nw_n - a_{n-1}w_{n-1} &\leq w_n - w_{n-1}
\end{aligned}$$

In our example, this yields

$$\begin{aligned}
    15a_2 - 10a_1 &\leq 5\\
    30a_3 - 15a_2 &\leq 15
\end{aligned}$$

Another issue arises now. If we do not alter our cost function and continue to minimize $$a_1 + \dots + a_n$$, then it could happen that
the poorest person in society is taxed 100%, since the only requirement is that that person remains the poorest. To ensure this does not
happen except in extreme cases, we alter the cost function so only $$a_1$$ is minimized. Thus we have

>Minimize $$a_1$$ such that $$a \cdot w = K$$, $$0 \leq a \leq 1$$ and $$a_{i+1}w_{i+1} - a_iw_i \leq w_{i+1} - w_i$$ for all $$i = 1, \dots, n-1$$.

For $$K = 40$$, this yields $$a_1 = 1/2$$, $$a_2 = 2/3$$ and $$a_3 = 5/6$$ in our example society, which is the same as before when we chose
to maximize the sum of the coefficients. However, the two schemes are not equivalent: for $$K = 30$$, for example, the maximizing scheme would yield
$$a_1 = a_2 = 1$$ and $$a_3 = 1/6$$. The current scheme gives us $$a_1 = 1/6$$, $$a_2 = 4/9$$ and $$a_3 = 13/18$$.

The difficulty in establishing a criterion for "fair" taxation lies in the fact that it's a zero-sum game: if one person pays less,
somebody else has to pay more. It is almost always possible to change the solution in somebody's favor by making them pay less and
having the rest of society make up the difference. Therefore, the question of "fair" taxation is an extremely difficult one, which
I suspect is actually unsolvable since individual taxes can almost always be lowered (at the cost of increasing other people's taxes,
of course, but people generally don't care about that as long as their own taxes go down).

What I have proposed in this article is a scheme which I feel is as "fair" as taxes can get. The scheme attempts two things:

1. minimize the cost for the poorest person in society;

2. maintain everybody's position in the wealth ranking.

The scheme guarantees that if person $$i$$ was at least as wealthy as person $$j$$ before taxation, then this will still be true after
taxes have been levied.

There is another scheme which deserves to be mentioned here, which is the so-called *flat tax*.
As its name implies, a flat tax pays for a certain cost $$K$$ by taxing every individual in society equally.
We then have

$$\begin{aligned}
    \sum_{i=1}^na_iw_i &= K\\
    a\sum_{i=1}^nw_i &= K\\
    a &= \frac{K}{\sum_{i=1}^nw_i}.
\end{aligned}$$

Hence, if we denote the total wealth in society by $$W$$, everybody pays a percentage $$K/W$$.
Clearly, as long as $$K \leq W$$, we have $$0 \leq K/W \leq 1$$ and so a flat tax can achieve any cost as long as society as a whole can
pay for it in at least one way. Thus, a flat tax can *always* work, whereas some progressive tax schemes might not depending on their
notion of fairness. The notion of fairness which gives rise to the flat tax is, of course, the desire to tax everybody equally.
All other proposed schemes are based on the idea that poorer people should be taxed less.

Does a flat tax preserve wealth rankings? If so, we must have

$$\begin{aligned}
    a_{i+1}w_{i+1} - a_iw_i &\leq w_{i+1} - w_i\\
    a(w_{i+1} - w_i) &\leq w_{i+1} - w_i\\
    a &\leq 1.
\end{aligned}$$

This is clearly always the case. Hence, a flat tax preserves wealth rankings, but it does not satisfy the notion of fairness introduced in this article
as it clearly does not minimize the tax rate for the poorest person in society. In fact, it does not minimize tax rates for anyone at all.
In our example, a cost of $$K = 40$$ would yield a flat tax rate of $$a = 8/11$$. Compare this with what my proposed scheme would yield in this case:
$$a_1 = 1/2$$, $$a_2 = 2/3$$ and $$a_3 = 13/18$$. We see that every single person is taxed higher under a flat tax regime than the scheme I proposed.
Thus, at least in some situations, the scheme proposed here would be preferred to a flat tax by everyone in society.
