---
title: "Mass Production"
layout: post
date: 2017-02-15
tags: math
---
Why are many goods much cheaper when bought in bulk as opposed to when they are bought seperately?
There is a simple mathematical model which can explain this. Suppose you are running some sort of factory
which produces some product $$p$$. To begin with, there is always a fixed cost you have to pay in order to
keep the factory itself running. This cost covers things like utility bills, employee salaries and other common expenditures.
Call this fixed cost $$b$$. Secondly, there is of course also some cost associated with the production of a single unit of $$p$$
which (I hypothesize) scales linearly with the amount of $$p$$ that is produced. Let $$a$$ be this per-unit cost. Then,
to produce $$n$$ units of $$p$$, the total cost comes down to a simple linear equation:
\begin{equation}
    c(n) = an + b.
\end{equation}
Its derivative wrt $$n$$ is easy to compute:
\begin{equation}
    c^\prime(n) = a.
\end{equation}
Now, it is plausible to assume that the per-unit cost $$a$$ is much less than the fixed cost $$b$$, i.e. $$a \ll b$$.
This means that even though the fixed cost can be very high depending on the product in question, the total cost of
production does not increase much by adding an extra unit. Intuitively, when $$n$$ is large, the unit cost will begin
to dominate the fixed cost until $$b$$ becomes negligibly small compared to $$an$$. That is the point where, if we
divide the total cost of $$n$$ units by the number of units, we end up actually paying very little per unit.
This quantity is given by
\begin{equation}
    \alpha(n) = \frac{c(n)}{n} = \frac{an + b}{n} = a + \frac{b}{n}.
\end{equation}
As $$n$$ gets larger and larger, this quantity obviously approaches $$a$$:
\begin{equation}
    \underset{n\to\infty}{\lim}\alpha(n) = a.
\end{equation}
So, as the number of units of $$p$$ ordered increases, the cost per unit of $$p$$ approaches the actual per-unit cost $$a$$,
with the fixed cost being spread evenly among the $$n$$ different units.
However, when $$n$$ is small, the per-unit cost is eclipsed by the fixed cost $$b$$ which is much larger than $$a$$.

Another interesting question one may ask is when, precisely, we "reach" the limit where $$\alpha(n) = a$$.
Mathematically speaking, of course, the answer is never, but we can quantify how close we are to that limit by solving the following equation for $$n$$:
\begin{equation}
    \frac{b}{c(n)} \leq \varepsilon.
\end{equation}
Given an $$\varepsilon$$ of our choosing, solving the above for $$n$$ yields the number of units we have to order for $$a$$
to make up a fraction of at least $$1 - \varepsilon$$ of the total cost. We find

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \frac{b}{an + b} &\leq \varepsilon\\
    \frac{an + b}{b} &\geq \frac{1}{\varepsilon}\\
    \frac{an}{b} + 1 &\geq \frac{1}{\varepsilon}\\
    n &\geq \frac{b}{a}\left( \frac{1}{\varepsilon} - 1 \right).
\end{aligned}
$$

Unsurprisingly, as $$\varepsilon$$ goes to zero, the number of units $$n$$ grows without bound.
However, we also see that as $$\varepsilon$$ goes to one, the number of units goes to zero.
It is clear that $$\varepsilon$$ must be constrained to lie within the interval $$(0,1]$$,
otherwise we get nonsensical results.

As a practical example, suppose we own a factory which produces soda cans.
Assume we have a fixed cost of $1500 per month, and a per-unit cost of $0.1.
How many cans must we produce in the span of one month so that each can only has to contribute $0.2 to the fixed cost?
This boils down to computing
\begin{equation}
    n \geq \frac{1500}{0.1}\left( \frac{1500}{0.2} - 1 \right) = 112,485,000.
\end{equation}
Approximately 112.5 million cans. This may seem like much, but a quick Google search suggests that the Coca Cola Company produces
about 100 million cans *each day*.

This analysis, though very simple and basic from a mathematical point of view, is very important for any company that
produces anything at all. After all, companies have to make a profit if they are to survive. So they are faced with this
simple question: how many units of product must be produced e.g. on a monthly basis in order for the company to turn a profit?
Assuming all produced units are sold within the required time span, the question boils down to setting a profit goal $$\gamma$$
and determining how much the company needs to charge for a unit of product in order to achieve $$\gamma$$.
If the company charges $$a + \lambda$$ per unit of product, the equation to be solved is

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \lambda n - c(n) &\geq \gamma\\
    (\lambda - a)n - b &\geq \gamma\\
    \lambda &\geq \frac{\gamma + b}{n} + a.
\end{aligned}
$$

Break-even occurs when $$\gamma = 0$$, where $$\lambda = \frac{b}{n} + a$$.
This formula also demonstrates the nice property that our profit goal and our fixed cost are distributed evenly among all units
produced. This explains why units become cheaper as more of them are made.
Solving the same equation for $$n$$ yields

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \lambda n - c(n) &\geq \gamma\\
    (\lambda - a)n - b &\geq \gamma\\
    n &\geq \frac{\gamma + b}{\lambda - a}.
\end{aligned}
$$

Break-even occurs at $$n = \frac{b}{\lambda - a}$$. In our hypothetical example, if we want to turn a profit of $2000 each month
and we charge $0.5 per can, we need to produce $$n = \frac{2000 + 1500}{0.4 - 0.1} = \frac{3500}{0.3} \approx 11,667$$ cans per month.
Conversely, if we have the capacity to produce 20000 cans per month, and we want a profit of at least $2000, then we need to
charge $$\lambda \geq \frac{2000 + 1500}{20000} + 0.1 = 0.275$$ dollars per can at least.

It is worth noting that $$\lambda$$ should be greater than $$a$$, otherwise we get nonsensical results. This is quite intuitive: if
$$\lambda < a$$ then that means we do not recover the full production cost of a unit when it is sold. It should be obvious that no
company can turn a profit doing that.

More generally, if we assume the demand for our product is a linear function of its price,
\begin{equation}
    D(\lambda) = l - k\lambda,
\end{equation}
then we can formulate the optimal price of our product as the following optimization problem:

>Maximize $$(\lambda - a)(l - k\lambda) - b$$ for $$\lambda$$.

Its solution is given by
\begin{equation}
    \lambda = \frac{1}{2}\left( a + \frac{l}{k} \right).
\end{equation}
Interestingly, if we choose $$\lambda$$ to be the optimal price as determined above, then we find $$\lambda > a$$ exactly when
$$\frac{l}{k} > a$$. Hence, if market research should show that $$\frac{l}{k} \leq a$$, then the product is simply not profitable
to produce at all.

Let's take our hypothetical factory example again and assume the demand curve is specified by $$D(\lambda) = 100 - 160\lambda$$.
The optimal price is $$\lambda = \frac{1}{2}( 0.1 + 0.625) = 0.3625$$, with $$D(0.3625) = 42$$ units sold at a profit of
$$(0.3625 - 0.1) \cdot 42 - 1500 = -1488.9750$$ dollars, which is a tremendous loss.