---
title: Rolling Your Own Crypto
date: 2017-06-11
layout: post
tags: infosec
---
Back in my younger, more naive days, I figured I could roll my own crypto and designed an encryption cipher which I personally thought was secure.
I even presented the algorithm to some of my fellow students, who agreed that it was probably "very secure".
In hindsight, however, we were all painfully misguided. This post will serve as a warning to other would-be cryptographers not to roll their own
crypto. This should not be taken to mean that you shouldn't experiment with designing your own cryptographic algorithms; by all means do so if
you're into that sort of thing. The main take-away point here is the following:

>Do not use cryptographic algorithms of your own design in critical production systems unless your algorithm has been vetted by other experts.

This advice applies to experts and novices alike, but mostly to novices since experts are already aware of this caveat.

# My shitty scheme

In general, a *private-key encryption scheme* such as the one I designed consists of a couple of algorithms:

1. A probabilistic key generation algorithm $$\mathsf{Gen}$$ which outputs a symmetric key to be used for encryption and decryption.
2. A probabilistic encryption algorithm $$\mathsf{Enc}$$ which takes a key $$k$$ and a plaintext $$m$$ and outputs a ciphertext $$\mathsf{Enc}_k(m)$$.
3. A deterministic decryption algorithm $$\mathsf{Dec}$$ which takes a key $$k$$ and a ciphertext $$\mathsf{Enc}_k(m)$$ and returns $$m$$.

It is important that all these algorithms run in polynomial time, otherwise no one could use them in practice.
In my case, these algorithms were as follows:

1. The key generation algorithm would generate a uniform random $$4 \times 4$$ integer matrix $$K$$.
2. The encryption algorithm would split up the plaintext $$m$$ into a sequence of integers $$m_1, m_2, \dots, m_l$$.
Padding was added to ensure $$l$$ is a multiple of three. Each block of three plaintext integers $$m_{3i}, m_{3i+1}, m_{3i+2}$$
was then concatenated with a random integer nonce $$r$$.
We thus get a 4-vector $$\vec{m}_i = [m_{3i}, m_{3i+1}, m_{3i+2}, r]$$ which is transformed into a ciphertext vector
$$\vec{c}_i = K\vec{m}_i$$. The encryption algorithm then outputs the final ciphertext $$c$$, which is the 
concatenation of all ciphertext vectors.
3. The decryption algorithm splits up the ciphertext $$c$$ into blocks $$\vec{c}_1, \dots, \vec{c}_l$$ of four integers each.
It then computes $$\vec{m}_i = K^{-1}\vec{c}_i$$. From this the original plaintext is easily recovered.
For numerical stability, the inverse of $$K$$ is never actually computed; rather, we solve the system of linear equations
determined by $$K\vec{m}_i = \vec{c}_i$$.

Clearly, if the plaintext is $$3b$$ integers long, the ciphertext will be $$4b$$ integers in length.
Correctness of this algorithm follows easily assuming $$K$$ is non-singular, and all algorithms clearly run in polynomial time.
As it turns out, a uniform random integer matrix is non-singular with high probability, so we need not worry about that.
But how secure is this algorithm? The casual observer may think that this algorithm is secure because the encryption cannot be
reversed without the key, and the key is a $$4 \times 4$$ integer matrix. On a 64-bit system, this yields a key of length 1024 bits.
By symmetric key standards, that's a very long key! (Average symmetric key sizes are 128 bits at the time of this writing.)
To anyone familiar with basic concepts in cryptography, however, the fact that the algorithm is completely linear is a huge red flag.

# Malleability of the scheme

Note first that this scheme is [malleable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malleability_(cryptography)), meaning we can apply a transformation
to the ciphertext such that the plaintext changes in a predictable way. For a ciphertext block $$\vec{c}$$, apply a transformation

$$
    \vec{c}^\prime = \alpha\vec{c}.
$$

The corresponding plaintext is then given by

$$
    \vec{m}^\prime = K^{-1}(\alpha\vec{c}) = \alpha\vec{m}.
$$

Multiplying any ciphertext block by a scalar $$\alpha$$ thus multiplies the corresponding plaintext block by the same amount!
This means the scheme is not secure against [chosen ciphertext attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chosen-ciphertext_attack).
Assume we have obtained a ciphertext $$c$$. We modify this ciphertext by multiplying its bytes by some scalar $$\alpha > 1$$ to
yield a ciphertext $$c^\prime \not= c$$. In the chosen-ciphertext setting, we have access to a decryption oracle $$\mathcal{O}$$
which returns the decryption of any ciphertext not equal to $$c$$. Hence, we query the oracle to obtain

$$
    m^\prime = \mathcal{O}(c^\prime).
$$

By the above argument, we have $$m^\prime = \alpha m$$. The plaintext can thus be calculated by dividing $$m^\prime$$ by $$\alpha$$.

# Security against chosen-plaintext attacks

This scheme is completely insecure against [chosen-plaintext attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chosen-plaintext_attack).
If we have access to an encryption oracle $$\mathsf{Enc}_K$$ (as we do in the chosen-plaintext setting), we can encrypt any
plaintext $$m$$ of our choosing to yield ciphertext blocks $$\vec{c}_i$$ where

$$
    \vec{c}_i = K(\hat{m}_i + e_4r_i) = K\hat{m}_i + Ke_4r_i.
$$

Here, $$\hat{m}_i = [m_{3i}, m_{3i+1}, m_{3i+2}, 0]$$.
We attack the scheme as follows. Encrypt the vectors $$[1, 0, 0]$$, $$[0, 1, 0]$$, $$[0, 0, 1]$$ and $$[0,0,0]$$ to obtain ciphertexts

$$\begin{aligned}
    \vec{c}_1 &= \vec{k}_1 + \vec{k}_4r_1,\\
    \vec{c}_2 &= \vec{k}_2 + \vec{k}_4r_2,\\
    \vec{c}_3 &= \vec{k}_3 + \vec{k}_4r_3,\\
    \vec{c}_4 &= \vec{k}_4r_4.
\end{aligned}$$

We then compute

$$
    g_i = \gcd(c_{i,1}, c_{i,2}, c_{i,3}, c_{i,4}).
$$

There is a non-zero probability that $$g_i = r_i$$ for $$i = 1, 2, 3, 4$$, in which case we clearly easily recover the entire key matrix.
We can repeat this procedure as much as we like until we have recovered the correct key, something which we can easily verify by simulating
the encryption process with the key and nonces we found.
